---
title: "Mathematical Approaches"
date: 2020-05-19T14:53:05+05:30
draft: true
Description: ""
Tags: []
Categories: []
menu: ""
---

Since the dawn of Machine Learning, tremendous progress has been made in the fields of text representation, image processing and their analysis and classification. Recently, speech recognition has also caught up with the pace. But the progress made in the field of music processing, analysis and classification is relatively less extensive. The primary reason behind this is that the complex structural and dynamical factors inherent to music are non-trivial for mathematical representation. They are usually multi-dimensional in nature, and hence, the tasks of processing and analysis are computationally intensive. Even the most popular collaborative filtering based music recommendation systems use the metadata of the songs for recommendation. But metadata is vulnerable to corruption, and is often lost, especially for old to very old songs. Consequently, their authorship is prone to contest, and in some cases, flat-out wrong. For example, some Western Classical pieces from the eighteenth to twentieth century Britain are known to be inspired from Indian Classical compositions of that time. But their true origins are still unknown. To tackle such issues, music needs to be mathematically formulated. All over the globe, different cultures perceive and represent music in a variety of different ways. For example, in Western Classical music, a root note is chosen from the 12 semitones in an octave, and the scale is developed choosing frequencies relative to the root note. All the notes represent a static frequency. Harmony is strongly emphasised. But, in Indian  Classical music, the so-called ‘root’ note selection has more weightage on feel and intuition. Even the drones, i.e. the Tanpura or the Shruti Box are tuned according to the feel of the composition rather than a distinct frequency. Every note in Indian Classical music is a Swarasthana i.e. an interval in the frequency spectrum with no static frequency. Melody is strongly emphasised. Due to such diversity in perception, mathematical generalisation of all representations of music is nearly impossible. The continuous nature and oral tradition of Indian Classical music makes its analysis non-trivial. As a result, literature in this area of research is scarce. To tackle this problem, Complexity Science can be employed for a mathematical formulation of Indian Classical music. A set of  ‘complexity’ measures, which are independent parameters of the composition can be devised. These ‘complexity’ measures must capture the structural aspects of the melody and the rhythm, but must also capture other dynamical aspects like harmony and frequency shifts in a single Swarasthana. A ‘similarity index’ can also be devised, which will be crucial for grouping a set of tracks as an album, a genre or attributed to an artist etc. This approach can expose the complex mathematical structure of Indian Classical music, which is heavily based on cognition. With this, the phylogeny in Indian Classical music can be recreated and its influence on a certain composition can be quantified. As a result, problems like tracing the unknown origins of certain very old compositions, which sound similar but belong to very different cultures, can be tackled.
